So now that we've talked
about factory methods--
it set the wheels in motion--
it's time to turn our attention
to the bulk of the methods
in the completable futures API,
which are the completion stage
methods.
And these completion
stage methods
chained together
dependent actions
that perform processing
of the results
of asynchronous
computations and also
help provide various types
of composition behaviors.
So let's talk about how we can
use completion stage methods
to chain actions together.
A completable future can
serve as a completion
stage for processing of
asynchronous results.
And basically what this means
is that the dependent action can
get called back automatically
by the computable futures
framework when an asynchronous
call finishes and returns
its result, in other words,
when the completable future
triggers.
Let's take a look at an example
here to illustrate this.
This example is going
to go ahead and create
a new unreduced big fraction.
You can see it's got
a very large numerator
as a big integer.
It's got a very large
denominator as a big integer.
And then it has the false flag
that says don't reduce now.
We'll reduce it later
in the background.
We then go ahead and
create a supplier lambda
that when called will reduce
the unreduced big fraction,
and then we go ahead
and call supply async,
which is our factory method.
And that passes in that supplier
lambda, which in the background
now will reduce that
unreduced big fractions,
so that's what it will do.
Now supply async returns
a completable future.
And when the
reduction is finished,
then the completable
future triggers,
and that will cause the then
apply completion stage method
to invoke its action, which
in this case, as you see,
is going to convert the
improper fraction to a mixed
fraction or a mixed string.
And so that will then run only
when the reduction finishes
occurring asynchronously.
You can chain together
these completion stage
methods fluently using the
so-called fluent interface
pattern.
And what happens
here is after we've
converted the reduced
fraction to a mixed string,
we can then accept
that particular result
and print it out.
So then accept
doesn't actually get
called until the completable
future returned from then
apply finishes its action
'til its action completes.
And at that point, we can then
accept it, and by accepting it,
we pass in a method
reference, which
will print the mixed string
out to the standard output.
So you can see we can chain
these things together.
You cannot do this with
conventional Java classic
futures.
Just doesn't work it all.
The way to think of this as
the various parameters that
are passed into the factory
methods and the completion
stage methods are basically
actions, lambda actions,
method references,
and so on, which
are intended to be
registered with the framework
and then applied later.
And the lambda
action will be called
only after the previous
stage completes successfully,
so only after we finished the
previous stage will the action
for the next stage be called.
And this is what we mean
when we talk about chaining.
When I talk about chaining
together the results,
chaining them fluently,
it's that syntax
that we're describing
that I'm showing you here.
And what's so cool about this--
I mentioned this
before, but it might
make a little bit more sense now
that you've seen more context--
this allows us to
treat asynchronous
processing very similar to how
we do synchronous processing.
We can just have fluent
calls where you do something,
you can get a result.
You do something, you can get a
result. You do something else,
you get a result because we're
basically chaining together.
And it looks as though
these calls are running
synchronously, but,
in fact, they're
running when the asynchronous
operation's complete.
So it's a really cool way to
make asynchronous programming
look like synchronous
programming,
so I take my hat off to the
designers of completable future
because it was a really
clever way to go.
So basically you can
think about these actions
as being deferred until the
previous stage completes
and, of course, until
a fork-join thread
is available to run them.
We'll talk later about how
the stages are run here.
Sometimes they borrow the
thread of the previous stage.
Sometimes they're run in a
separate thread in the pool.
Now what is the reason
for doing all this stuff?
Well, the reason
here is to avoid
blocking a calling
thread or a user thread
until the result absolutely
must be obtained.
So as a good rule of thumb, try
to avoid calling join or get
unless you absolutely need to do
it, unless you really, really,
really need to have that
result. Server side code
that uses completable
futures may
be able to avoid
blocking completely.
You may never have to block.
You just set things in motion,
and the last thing you do
is send a response back to
the client when you're all
done running asynchronously.
Clients may need
to join sparingly.
And you typically need
to join when you really
need the result in order
to give it to the user.
And I'll also show
you some examples
when we talk about
our test programs
where we have to use
join because otherwise
our program will
start everything
asynchronously and then
return from the main function.
The process will shut
down, and we'll never
see the results of our tests.
So that's a good example
of when to use joint,
but you should really
try to use join
in a very, very sparing way.
And the goal of all
this, not blocking,
is to improve responsiveness.
Remember that reactive
programming manifesto principle
of being responsive.
So don't block the client.
Let the client thread
do its own thing
until we get the results back.
The completable future serves
as the completion stage
for asynchronous
result processing.
I like to think about this--
when I read those words,
I like to think about
this in terms of analogy.
And the analogy is juggling.
So if you have ever
done any juggling,
you know that the
goal is to try to keep
as many balls in the air,
grabbing them synchronously
only long enough to transfer
them and throw them back
up again to float in
the air asynchronously.
And the same thing is true
for the completion stages
and completable futures.
You really want to keep
things floating in the air
by letting them run
asynchronously and only grab
them long enough to start
another asynchronous
computation.
So that's a way to
think about this.
The big win is to keep lots of
things running asynchronously
and only grab them long
enough to start them
up again asynchronously or to
print the results or something.